Hello again. Uh, so in my past few videos, I've been showing you examples of formalizations
of fairly simple statements in Lee, either statements in universal algebra that didn't
require many prerequisites or fairly well-known statements in rural analysis. Um, so here I would
like to give an example of a more realistic formalization task coming from one of my projects,
the polynomial-file minutiae project. So this is kind of a more, um, in the wild type of formalization
task. Um, and here, um, this task asked significantly trickier and, um, in particular, the AI tools
that were quite useful in the previous examples, they are of less utility, currently, at a current
level of development, although I do expect them to catch up and also be useful for these tools
as well. But so, um, basically I want to illustrate what it does like currently to, um, formalize
by hand, um, when, uh, the task is too difficult for current AI tools to, uh, to assist with,
uh, um, extensively. So the, um, uh, this project, uh, its primary goal has been completed. Uh, it,
um, we, we formalized the proof of something called the polynomial-file minutiae conjecture of
Catalan Martin, um, in the case of two torsion groups. Um, but then there was a generalization
to M torsion groups that is still in the process of being formalized. This is the blueprint
of the formalization process. At the bottom, we have the final theorem, which is a certain
theorem in combinatorics about sets of small doubling in, um, finite million groups of, of fixed
torsion. Uh, we will not focus so much on the specific, um, go here. Uh, but, as you can see from
the blueprint, uh, this theorem has been broken up into about 40 or 50 odd lemurs, uh, and definitions,
um, which will be proven separately. Uh, so some of these have ticks next to them, which means
that they're having correctly, they're having fully formalized. Uh, but about half of them still
do not have, um, that tick mark. And so we are, um, we have an incomplete proof currently.
So what I'd like to do is, is formalize some of the, um, intermediate, um, lemurs in here and,
and complete a few more of the tick marks. Um, I'll show you the graphical depiction of this project,
which may be a little bit more visually appealing. So this is the blueprint, not just of this
particularly m torgent, uh, result of the entire project. Um, every bubble here, um, represents one
lemma, um, or the rectangles, also represent definitions. Um, and they color coded. Uh, the green
bubbles are those, uh, bubbles that have been already proven in lean. And the blue bubbles are the
ones that, um, have been, uh, the theorem has been stated. The lemma has been stated, but not yet
proved. Um, so for example, uh, one of the, um, uh, lemurs I hope to, to prove today is the,
is this level 12.18, which, uh, proves a certain inequality between two different notions of
distance on, um, random variables on, um, on a certain appealing group. Now for this task,
we won't need to know precisely what these, um, definitions, uh, these distances are.
There are other lemmas elsewhere in this project that, um, that have already established
many facts about them, and we'll be taking those lemmas as a black box. Um, so this is one of the
advantages of a formalization scheme like this is that, um, it really, um, modularizes the task of
formalizing a very complicated theorem into us of atomic pieces where you don't need to understand
the entire project in order to fill one little piece. So, uh, we're going to go back to the, um,
this specific lemma that we're going to prove, which is, uh, this, uh, this lemma here,
which is taken by the way from directly from the paper that this is based on. So, um, over here,
um, um, I'm showing a paper of myself with Tim Gower's Ben Green and Freddie Manners.
Um, this 33 page paper is the paper of, of which is the proof in his derived, and this, uh,
um, claim here lemma 3.1 part two is the claim that, um, we are going to try to formalize.
Now, uh, this, um, this lemma in the paper, it only had a three-line proof.
Um, it's a consequence of a earlier statement part one, which I just spent most of this
morning formalizing actually. So, uh, part one has, uh, maybe a six-line truth, which, um,
I was good-rusted. It took me a long time I expected to formalize this, but now I'm back up to
speed. I expected this learn to be relatively, at this part, relatively short.
Um, so, um, the blueprint basically copies the, the, um, uh, this, the proof, the three-line proof from
the, um, from the paper, but it's, it's quite, uh, high-level. This is not really an atomic
line-by-line proof that we can, uh, just, uh, hope to get, for example, with AI to formalize.
Uh, but we'll see how we go with, uh, with this task.
So, uh, we're going to switch now to the IDE.
Okay. So, um, this is the current state of the formalization process. You can see
there's thousands of lines here already. Um, right here is the statement, um, that we're going
to try to prove that, uh, if you have, uh, that's number M bigger than two, and we have some, um,
M double, of, um, measure spaces, omega i, and, um, some random variables taking values in a
group G, G, has been defined previously to be an individual group. Then there's a certain, uh,
inequality between a sum of certain distances between X, J, and themselves, um, and then, um,
some constant times, another type of distance, this capital D is called multi, uh, multi-distance.
So, this is the claim. Um, based on my experience formalizing, uh, the previous, uh, claim,
uh, we're going to need some additional measurability hypotheses. Um, this statement was formalized
without, um, well, without proving that it was true. So, um, in the course of formalizing the
previous statement, I realized that I needed, uh, also some extra hypotheses, like such as, um,
omega being a probability measure, um, the excess needs are finite range, and be measurable,
and so forth. Uh, so we, we will add those in as needed. Um, so just for, um, uh, as a guide,
I'm going to, uh, just add in the sketch of proof, um, that we're going to use.
Okay. So, uh, the way we're going to prove this is, um, so this inequality is going to be a
consequence of the previous inequality. So, um, so, um, this is anybody controlling a diagonal
distance, d xj xj, uh, and we had a previous lemma, which controlled an off-diagonal distance,
d xj, uh, x minus xk. So, uh, the first step is to get a relation between them. Okay. So,
we're going to have a, um, have a claim. And for all j and k, um, from 1 to m,
actually from 0 to m minus 1, uh, I want to show that the, uh, distance,
uh, distance between xj and xj is bounded by two times the distance between xj and minus xk.
Okay. So, that's going to be our first step. Um, and that's using a previous, uh, tool, um,
which is firsted here, uh, as we were just trying to go. So, let's go look at it, uh,
over on, on the blueprint side. Okay. So, uh, we're going to use the lemma 3.18.
So, we're going to use a certain triangle inequality that this distance is known to satisfy.
Let's have a look at, uh, its lean code. All right. So, um, this, uh, this, um,
inequality has a lot of, uh, of hypotheses, but it is a, uh, triangle inequality
distance. Let me just copy this, uh, uh, description over here just for reference. Let's
go back to my IDE. All right. So, um, yeah, what we're going to do is that we're going to make
this as a calc walk. Okay. So, um, we're going to found distance between x and j and x of j by
the distance, uh, distance j and minus xk. And then the distance between minus xk.
xj. Uh, that was interesting. Uh, oh, okay. It seems to be good to cover. It may have actually done
that for us, except that it didn't quite work, but we'll fix that later. Uh, and then we need that to
equal, um, well, um, what's going to happen is that first of all, we're going to, we're going to
to symmetrize the, the, the, the, the description is also symmetric.
And then, uh, that's going to equal, uh, what we, uh, what we need, uh,
uh, okay, yeah, I'll show by a ring identity. Okay. So, uh, we need to use the triangle inequality.
Um, okay. So, um, get up, go by the, try to help us here. Uh, but it's, uh, uh, so we have
less of a look at the symbol. We need, uh, artist triangle, um, the first argument, uh, actually, uh,
this argument we need is actually, we need the measurability of the first purple xj. Uh, so let's
not, uh, okay, so actually, um, I think we just delete these, this might work. Let's see.
Um, so, uh, what for, uh, okay, we have some, uh, okay, we need measurability that we don't
actually have. Um, so, uh, we need to actually put that in, uh, let's see,
then what after we define x, we would like a measurability axiom, therefore i,
uh, we need x i to be measurable.
Put that in, uh, we can see if that works. Yeah. So, uh, what for, um, get up before, is that
some of these, um, arguments of this method, uh, did not need to be specified. So, if, if you look
at the, um, uh, the spelling of the theorem down here, you'll notice that some of the arguments are
in, um, parentheses, which means they are explicit, and some of them curly braces, um, which is
lean way of saying that, um, you don't need to specify these arguments. They will try to infer
those arguments from context, from all the other, uh, information. Okay, um, so the actual, in fact,
we're only two, um, arguments, uh, three actually, uh, we need measurability of, of, uh, x, y, and z. So
that's xj minus xk and xj, okay, so actually this one will not be right. Uh, this will be something
which we will work out, uh, in the h. Um, yeah, we need to, um, um, give this method a
measurability certificate for xj minus xk and xj. Um, but there is an additional problem because, um,
this theorem requires these random variables x, y and z to also have finite range, as you can
see over here, uh, and we didn't actually specify that as a hypothesis. So that actually we need to,
to add, um, so we're gonna add that as a hypothesis, and if we're lucky, um, lean will be able to
use that hypothesis and just, uh, fill in the, uh, okay, so, uh, now we're good, okay, um,
so we're not done, we have several goals, uh, but it did, uh, um, okay, it's complaining that we
also need, um, uh, these spaces to be probability measures, okay, so we also need to add that as a
hypothesis. Okay, um, I think it is probably measured. So, uh, we need the measure attached to,
these measure spaces to be a probability measure, uh, y is not, uh, here we go, and this one
again should be, um, again, um, okay, uh, so now we have much better shape. Uh, we actually just need
to show, um, one more goal, which is the visibility of negative xk. Um, now, uh, we do know that xk is
measurable, um, and I do know that there's a method called measurable, uh, okay, so there's a tool,
there's a demo precisely for this, which is the, um, it's called measurable.neg, um, which
says that if a function is measurable, then it's negative, it's also measurable, and now we've
reduced things to the measurable to xk, which has good health supplies, and that's exactly, uh,
hmsk. So that's the first step here. Um, now, uh, the next claim that I set up is we need to
show that this is equal to this, um, I can cancel for first term, it's not being relevant. Um,
so that should, um, and that should just be the symmetry. If I'm lucky, um,
Lee might be able to guess it from, no, okay, so, um, it probably has a bit of trouble because, um,
it needs some measurability to have other sneeze, which, uh, we don't have yet. Uh, okay, so, um,
let me go back to, uh, the blueprint. Um, so, um, yeah, one, one reason why the, um,
the usual tools are not super useful is because, um, for example, the ESAI large language
are not trained on the PFR project. Um, they do have, uh, a lot of information about math
lived, which is useful. But, uh, the lemmas we're going to use here are not in the central, um,
lean math library. They're in this separate PFR project. Um, in the future, I would expect to have,
AI models that can train locally on specific databases. Um, so, uh, uh, right now we actually need,
the symmetry lemma. It's got artists sim, uh, so we're just going to
apply that. Uh, why was, uh, Kongra, uh, Kongra, oh, um, okay.
Uh, Kongra was doing something that, uh, that was absorbing a lot of CPU. Um, I only work to cancel
one level of addition here. Um, okay. I, I just need this to be true. I will apply symmetry.
And I want to apply symmetry. Oh, I'm done. Okay. So I don't need anything else. All right. That's
nice. Um, slightly surprised. I thought I would need to prove measurability again. Uh, but maybe,
maybe this lemma, uh, okay. It looks like this lemma turns out to be true even without
measurability. Um, so one thing that that is interesting when you formalize in lean is that, uh,
sometimes the hypotheses that you think are needed to prove a lemma are not actually needed.
Um, so when proving theorems about random variables, you would expect you would need the random
variable to be measurable. Um, but surprisingly for some very basic identity, such as the symmetry,
uh, that's, that's actually not needed. Um, which is, uh, convenient because it simplifies certain
proofs. Okay. So we have proven this, um, specific, uh, claim. So, uh, um, the way we're going to
deal with this is that we're going to, to use the previous bound, which is this, um, and then insert,
uh, and set this inequality here. Um,
all right. So, uh, I think, uh,
all right, but this is a double sum. Um, and this, some m minus one here and here, there's a two
times m. Uh, so, I think what I need to do is to first sum this, uh, this inequality over all
j and k, which are not equal. So I'm going to have a second claim that if I sum over j and I sum
over k, um, and then, um, actually, um, I have some notation from this, my previous, um,
uh, uh, previous lemma, and I think, uh, I'm actually going to, to, to use, uh, to use this. Um,
so in my previous formalization, I set up actually, um, some notation for summing over j and k,
off diagonal sums, and then I, I proved some basic facts about them. Uh, I didn't realize that I
would use them again. Uh, so I put them inside this, this previous, uh, lemma, but actually, um,
I'm going to need these right now. So I'm going to actually,
um, read these out. Okay, so, um, that's about now I, uh, now I need, um, to change some text a little bit.
Okay, so, um, I'm going to define a sum notion. Um, yeah, later on, I will fix this, uh, I'll change
this sum to something, uh, uh, a bit more localized. Uh, I don't want to use up the word sum in the
global namespace, but, uh, um, uh, so let's take these little lemmas that I had previously
derived and convert them into external lemmas.
So I had some previous lemmas and I would actually, I'm going to sum implicit, uh, because
so that's the first lemma.
Convert similar here.
Um, I hope that if I can get, uh,
uh, co-pilot this morning.
Okay, I think I did what I wanted.
Uh, uh, two things. Oh, HM.
Oh, I need, uh, some cases I need a hypothesis, actually.
Um, uh, right. Yeah, some of these lemmas require
uh, and we get this one memory.
Okay, so I know quite a certain amount of
mixing.
Okay, I think it's an intro-inferring, uh, HM.
Okay, uh, why is this still comparing here?
No, then we'll complaints. Okay, so I'm with this outside.
This is why, um, so now,
You know these are what we need.
So hypothesis.
Okay, good, it looks like my previous code compiled.
Okay, there it is.
In the shoot down here, but I will do that later.
Okay, so the whole thing that I had this bound here, which is point wise for j and k.
And I had a previous tool, which I called some less than a equation.
That if you had two functions and one of them was point my spine about the other, then the sum of the most spun about the somewhere.
Some means this off diagonal sum, which is.
Kind of was here.
Next, I think yet.
So let's go ahead and.
Apply that.
So I have claim to.
Just want to just.
I just want to do some less than and equal to.
Okay, I do need this.
Just j not equal to k in here, but actually it's I think the easiest way to do that is to just insert it in the previous claim.
So.
One, I'm going to insert in this useless hypothesis.
It's harmless, but allows me to apply this.
And.
Why is it complaining now?
No, I think there's no argument.
See, so I'm less than you equal to.
First of all, I can take two functions and then this claim, if I do that.
So that's good. That should give me.
Climbing to.
I can see that.
It's not a good idea to call this sum because some actually mean something.
Let's say it's got off diagonal sum.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Fix all these.
Something's to you need to change as well.
It's got to change as well.
All right.
There it is.
So I can play back here.
Okay.
17.
Change as well.
Okay.
So just recycle this name space here.
Okay.
So let's see if.
I can pass properly.
All right.
So I've got this claim.
The way I want to use this.
Okay.
So I've got it.
On the other hand, I have this other.
I want to use the previous memory.
Which is that the sum is bounded by.
And that's a minus one.
Okay. So let's.
Let's make a new claim.
I think I'm off diagonal sum.
Of the function perhaps J.
Okay.
To the XJ.
X minus K.
This should be less than I think.
M times M minus one times.
Times this.
Okay.
Okay.
So this should come from the previous.
I want to apply this.
Okay.
It's not X minus K is minus XK.
There's a real company here.
Okay.
Not still completing.
H omega.
It's really a function.
I don't need to apply the lambda.
It's better to do that.
Okay.
I applied my previous lemma.
And it went through.
But I need to verify four things.
It's separate.
I can see them.
Okay.
The first thing I need to verify is that M is bigger than one.
I'm already assuming M is bigger than equal to two.
So that says linear arithmetic.
The next thing is I need to verify.
Majoribility.
Where is it?
So that is just the image.
Then what's the next goal?
Okay.
Okay.
Majoribility.
Oh, the probability measure hypothesis.
Yeah.
So that's probably just each problem.
And then finite range.
Well, that's supposed to be H.
I have all my hypothesis, but I think.
It doesn't like this one for some reason.
Alright.
Okay.
So I have these two claims.
I can bound this son by this.
Okay.
And then this guy I can simplify.
Because when you're taking off diagonal sum of a function that depends on your J.
That's actually just the sum of that function times M minus one.
So that's actually a claim that I needed previously.
I think that code is like off diagonal left.
Yeah.
Well, I'm here.
Just to say what this Linda turned that off.
Anything goes also.
Some similar problem here.
Okay.
So I'm just going to apply this.
Just lemma.
In doing so, I noticed that I need to implement once.
I'll just.
As a claim.
I need to hear.
Just need to wait for the.
Linda to catch up.
Okay, good.
Alright.
So we don't we now know that M minus one times this son is bound by the sum of twice.
Actually, minus X kept minus X K.
I need to pull the two out as well.
So I think I have a tool for that as well.
I'm lucky.
No, actually, I want to have some.
I want to have one division.
I need to.
I need a corresponding claim from obligation.
Yeah, that's not what I want.
So I want to have a function.
And a constant.
I want to say that I can pull out a constant.
I need to bound like this.
Okay.
It's my copy of my previous proof.
So I want the someone on the left.
What are you complaining about now?
No, three inputs.
I want to have them.
So I don't have a tool that allows me to port constants out of.
So I'm just going to apply that now.
Where was I down here?
I can just combine it with previous.
I really should call it mouse on or some.
I don't have a lot of applications.
So the name convention says to use both some.
I do that.
It's up to two rewrites now.
Let's see where this gets us.
Okay, it's complaining, but it's not telling you why it's complaining.
Okay.
Very good.
So I found this quantity by twice this quantity here.
So this and this need to combine to give me this.
So this can be done. Okay.
I'm really lucky.
I'll be able to.
I wasn't quite that lucky.
Okay, so this I think I can do by a calculator block.
So the summer want.
I'm just going to add and subtract.
Okay, one win for that.
What's supposed to happen is I'm going to add and subtract.
So I'm going to divide this.
I'm going to use.
So slow.
I need to look at what I'm trying to change together here.
I'm going to.
I'm waiting.
Oh, okay.
There's one annoying issue here is that.
M is an actual number.
And.
And minus one.
Is an actual number doesn't have an inverse.
That's annoying.
It's just temporarily.
Except making this real.
It's what I'm trying to do here.
Okay.
Mine's few times.
So.
I also ends being.
Carcer true.
We will number here.
Think.
Yeah.
All right.
That.
And if I use that other thing, I should be pounded.
I think I'm going to shake now.
Okay.
So.
Change together.
Various.
I need.
I was.
Yeah.
That should just cancel to what I want.
Okay.
I'll just emphasize.
There's a while minus one.
It's trying to subtract one from the entire numbers rather.
That's not what I want at all.
Let's do that.
Okay.
Okay.
It seems to be a bit confused.
Okay, let's finally come out.
All right.
So I've got these four.
To finish the proof here.
These are messages should go away soon, I think.
An artifact of some previous compilation.
Okay.
So another drawback of a reward formalization project is that once
you're a couple thousand lines in.
The compilations slow down quite a bit.
At least on my smaller laptop.
I think I said things up so that everything should be.
Good.
Okay.
So this.
I can't want to be in a quality given.
So this should just be a canceling operation.
Yeah.
But I need a mindset to not be zero.
That's going to be it.
So we'll put it up later.
Okay.
So.
Okay.
This identity should just be.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay, that does work.
Okay.
Now, I need M.
I just want to not be zero.
In fact, it's not very positive.
I'm really lucky that you just follow from the new orthotic.
Since I already know that M is bigger than 1.
There was a tiny issue because M here's a natural number.
And here M is a real number.
Hopefully the need is smart enough to figure out this out.
Of course, not.
Okay.
Here's where the fast enough sufferings.
It's like you're knowing.
M was already proven to be bigger than 1 or equal to 1 in the natural numbers.
But I needed to be true.
Also in the.
Reals and then I should be able to show that.
Therefore, M minus 1 is positive.
Seriously.
You really can't prove this in the new orthotic.
Oh, I want strictly greater.
Oh, okay.
No, I need.
Of course, I can't do this because it's equal to 1.
Yeah, sorry.
I'm really two.
I should come from a previous hypothesis.
Okay.
I feel that M is at least two.
Then you should be able to show that M is minus 1 is positive.
Good. All right.
So that was a bit silly, but.
Okay.
I had made a slight mistake here.
All right.
Okay. I can see that.
I'm going to need this elsewhere.
So I'm just going to pull it out.
All right.
So for the second claim.
This is factor of M minus 1 inverse that should just get.
It should happen.
Okay.
So those.
And then.
What's left should just be the claim, actually.
Keep on going.
Okay.
I can't go.
I already sold everything.
Oh.
Apparently, I need a positivity.
But this I can.
I can do.
All right.
So there's a method.
I'll just use the.
I do this.
Okay.
Of course, we want to show that some is not negative.
Then it suffices to show that the individual terms are not negative.
Oh, it didn't give me.
Yeah.
It gave me one of the things I needed.
All right.
Let's go.
Okay.
There's a method which I think is named something like fit set some non-neg.
Oh, in fact, it is that.
All right.
Yeah, someone on negative function is not negative.
So that's why I need to apply here.
Do that.
Hopefully that works.
There's more goals.
I was going to need m minus one, but less than two.
Wait.
Wait.
Actually, some bad things are happening here.
This is not what I want at all.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Oh, it's it's it's conquering too much.
I was trying to make m minus one bounded by two.
I should not use.
Okay.
Okay.
First thing I'm going to have to.
I need to regroup.
Application.
Like that.
And you do it twice.
See.
I just.
She can't quite just one level of this.
No such ability.
I want to cancel.
Right.
It actually solved it completely.
All right.
I guess it detected a claim, which is what's needed to finish.
Okay.
I will take that.
So here.
M minus one.
This.
Okay.
So again, I need to reassociate.
The right hand side.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Did this.
Okay.
Should do.
Two pieces.
I do that.
Okay.
I'm lucky.
Should just follow from what the claims already have.
Good.
Last thing.
Lucky.
That should just be a cancelling.
Okay.
You're.
Got this far.
Okay.
I need to.
It's.
It didn't completely close because I just.
Okay.
All right.
So I did actually finish the proof of this, but it was.
More annoying and expected.
Okay.
Yeah.
So that is a real world formalization task.
So lots of friction.
Still, unfortunately.
But it is doable.
Okay.
One of them are in one hour.
There is a small Z and L, which I'll fix later.
It says it's not super interesting.
Okay.
But thank you for watching.
